Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to create our very first server without further ado, let's jump right
into the action.
So go ahead and make sure that you have the folder that you created in the previous lesson open in a
text editing program.
And here we can see that I have opened the test JS file that I created in the previous lesson.
Let's go ahead and a race or delete everything inside that file and give ourselves a clean slate.
Or if you wanted to, you could just create a brand new file within that same folder.
OK, so we've got a clean slate.
What is our goal for this lesson?
Well, we want to create a server that listens for incoming requests so that we can visit that server
in our Web browser and have the server send back a response that says something simple, like maybe
Hello World, or welcome to our Web page.
So back in our text editor, the question is, how can we use code to create a server?
The answer is that we need to use environmental jargon.
So the first step is to realize that we are writing code for the node environment, not the web browser
environment.
So back when we were writing code for the Web browser environment, we could use the JavaScript language
itself, right?
The core of the language.
We could say something like let favorite number equal seven.
Right.
And that's valid JavaScript, no matter which environment we are in.
However, back in the Web browser, if we wanted to do something Web browser ish, like respond to a
click event or select an element, we needed to use special words like, remember, the Web browser
has an object named document and document is not part of the JavaScript language itself.
It's just a word that the Web browser brings to the table so that we as programmers can leverage the
environment that we are in.
Well, we need to do the same thing with node.
So we are in the node environment and we want to do something no dish like setting up a server.
So we need to use nodes, special words.
So typed this out with me h, t, p and then we want to look inside that and call a method named create
server parentheses to call the method.
And just a quick note.
If you're using voice code as your text editor like I am, you might notice that when you type HTP.
It gives you all of these suggestions, and if you try to type a dot right after that, it's going to
use one of the suggestions.
So what you can do is type HTTP and then either hit the escape key on your keyboard to get rid of the
suggestions or just push the arrow keys on your keyboard to move around a little bit and then you can
include the DOT and then create server parentheses.
Now HTP is not part of the JavaScript language itself, but just like the Web browser has the document
object that we can leverage, the node environment has this HTTP object that we're going to leverage
now.
We don't want the server that this method is going to create to just float around in outer space.
So instead let's store it in a variable.
So at the beginning of this line we can just say let and then I'm going to say our app equals.
But you could choose whatever variable name you want.
You don't have to use our app.
You could call it pizza or unicorn or anything.
OK, but the point is, is that we now have this variable that is a server and we know that the job
of a server is to listen for incoming requests.
So let's tell the server to begin listening.
So on a new line, I'm going to say our app dot listen.
Right.
So just like way back in one of our very first lessons when we had a dog object and told it to jump
or we had a cat object and told it to meow, in this case we have a server object and we are telling
it to begin listening.
Next, what we need to do is tell the server what exactly it should do when it does receive a request.
Right.
What should the server do in response to an incoming request?
Well, that's exactly what these parentheses up on the first line of code are for.
When we call the http dot create server method, we want to pass it a function as an argument and then
the server is going to run or execute or call that function every time it receives an incoming request.
So you could make up a name for a function here and then down here, define a function with that matching
name.
However, since we don't really need to call this function anywhere else, why don't we just go ahead
and create an anonymous function right within these parentheses?
So I'm going to say function, parentheses, curly brackets and feel free to drop down inside the curly
brackets.
And actually, before we start writing the body of our function here, let's first give our function
to parameters.
So right after the word function within these parentheses, let's say RFQ, which is short for request,
and then let's include a comma and include another parameter and name it address, which is short for
response.
Technically, you could make up any two names you want for the parameters, but these names make a whole
lot of sense, request and response.
OK, and now within the body of our function, we can leverage the request and response objects that
the server is going to pass into our function every time it calls the function.
Now we will learn more about the request object in a few minutes, but for now, all we really need
is the response object.
So remember our goal for this lesson?
When someone sends a request to our server, we simply want to respond by saying hello and welcome to
our Web site.
So within the body of our function, let's use the response object and call a method named and write.
We want to end our response by sending a little bit of text that says hello and welcome to our website.
OK, now, before we save this file until node to actually run it, there are two tiny details that
we need to address.
So first, in the node environment, whenever we use a special node word or ability in this case HTP,
we need to explicitly tell node to load or import or require in that functionality or that ability.
So even though HTP is part of node, we still need to add a new line of code up the very top of our
file and say let HTP equal and then we tell node to load or import or require in that ability.
So we just say require parentheses.
And in those parentheses we say quotes htp.
No.
We'll know what we mean with this chunk of code, and then we are storing that functionality in a variable
named HTP.
So then in our code down here, node will know what we mean when we say HTP.
OK, there's only one more detail that we need to take care of before we save the file and take it for
a test drive down on our very bottom line within the parentheses for the listen method.
We need to pass it.
A port.
No, as an argument.
Let's say three thousand.
Don't worry, I do not expect this number of three thousand to make sense right now, but it will come
into focus very soon.
OK, now let's go ahead and save this file and then let's use the command line to tell Node to run or
execute our file.
If you're using voice code, you can open up your command line by pushing control in the till the key,
or you can always click the view menu and then choose terminal.
OK, in the command line, let's say node and then a space and then the name of our file.
So my file is named Test.
James, yours might be named something different, so keep that in mind.
But after you type in node in the final name, push enter.
And now at this point our server is up and running right now.
I want you to jump over to your Web browser and let's try to send a request to the server.
So up in the address bar, type this in with me, clear out the address bar and let's say localhost
localhost is the address for your own computer.
And then we can say Colen and then the port number that our server is running on.
And remember, we chose a port number of three thousand.
So localhost Colen three thousand push enter.
Awesome.
There we see the response from our server.
Hello and welcome to our Web site.
So at this point, we've accomplished the original goal of this lesson.
We created a server that listens for incoming requests and it sends back a response.
Well, that didn't take too long.
So let's give ourselves another new goal for this lesson.
So with a real world website or Web application, we know that you can visit different are to visit
different pages.
For example, a lot of websites have an about page or an about US page.
So if we came up into the address bar and after the three thousand added a slash about and tried to
visit that URL, we still see the exact same response.
So let's give ourselves the goal of sending back different responses, depending on the you are all
that the visitor is trying to visit.
How about if someone visits the base?
You URL just localhost three thousand.
We send back text that says hello and welcome to our home page.
And if they visit maybe about we say thank you for the interest in our company.
So how can we accomplish that?
Well, let's jump back into our text editor and this is a great time to learn about the request object.
Remember that every time the server receives an incoming request, it's going to run our function.
Now, we've already leveraged the response object that gets passed into our function.
We called response DOT.
And to send back this response, well, now let's leverage the request object that gets passed into
our function.
The request object contains a bunch of information about the current incoming request.
So if we want to be aware of which you are URL, the users trying to visit, all we need to do is dig
in to the request object.
Let me show you what I mean within the body of our function here, maybe right before this response,
not end line.
Let's add a brand new line and say console dot log.
And what we want to log is our Q or request and then dot and look inside it for a property named you
are l OK, go ahead and save the file and then we need to close or quit the current instance of node
that is running our old file or our outdated file.
So down in the command line, push control and see on your keyboard at the same time.
OK, that just told Node to stop running our previous version of our code because the listen method
is open ended or ongoing.
It's just going to keep listening until we tell it to stop listening.
So we stopped our server and now that we've saved the changes to this file, we just want to start the
server back up again.
So just run the exact same command node test or whatever the name of your file is.
OK, now if we go back into the Web browser and if we try to visit localhost three thousand.
Slash about and then jump back into the command line, you can see that that got logged out to the console,
that slash about.
So now each time a request comes into the server, are functions going to run?
And we're going to see that value.
So if you typed slash pizza and tried to visit that URL, you better believe that you're going to see
that in the node console and back in the Web browser.
If we just visited the base URL localhost Kolan three thousand, we just see a forward slash with nothing
after it.
Now this might seem basic, but this really opens up the door to a lot of possibilities.
Let me show you what I mean.
So back up in our code.
Let's get rid of this console log line.
And then let's go ahead and cut this response and line into our clipboard.
So cut that.
OK, now let's use an if statement to send back a different response, depending on the euro, the users
trying to visit.
Let me show you what I mean.
So let's say if parentheses, curly brackets and for the condition in the if parentheses, we can just
say if request you are URL.
Equals quotes and then just a forward slash, that would be the home page.
So within the curly brackets for the statement, you can paste in your clipboard and let's adjust it
to say hello and welcome to our home page.
OK, and then right below this if statement was just set up, another if statement, say if parentheses
curly brackets for this condition, let's say if requested, you are all equals.
And again, that's double equals sign to check for equality instead of assigning a value if it equals
quotes about well then within the curly brackets for that if statement based in your clipboard, let's
send back a response relevant to the about page.
Say thank you for the interest in our company.
OK, now let's go ahead and save the file and test it out, so down in the command line, let's quit
this instance of Noad.
So control see?
Be sure to click onto the command line area of your screen before trying to push control.
See, and we just want to fire the server up again using the newest version of our code in this file.
So again, we just say no test.
And over in the Web browser, let's try it out.
So if we visit, just localhost three thousand.
Hello and welcome to our home page.
If we visit Slash about.
Thank you for the interest in our company.
Awesome.
Now, while we're at it, why don't we add a fallback so that if someone tries to visit a different
Eurail, the world doesn't end and our server doesn't just sit there and hang or throw an error?
Let me show you what I mean back in our text editor.
If neither of these if statements is true, meaning if someone tries to visit a neutral that is not
the base you URL, nor is it about, well, we just want to handle that situation.
So maybe right below this second if statement, let's just paste in our clipboard or you can just manually
type it out and say response our end and say we cannot find the page you are looking for.
OK, I'm going to save the file, come down to the command line, click anywhere in this command line
area and push control C to stop the old server and then fire up the latest version of our codes of no
test, come back to the Web browser.
So we see that our about page still works.
The home page still works.
But if I try to visit a bogus URL, we cannot find the page you are looking for at this point.
I want you to give yourself a pat on the back because you just created your first server.
Now I realize this super basic server might not seem very impressive, but it does open the door to
all sorts of possibilities.
So the question becomes, what's next?
Where do we go from here?
Well, so far, our server or app can respond to the role of the incoming request.
But do you know it would make our server a thousand times more interesting if we could respond to the
value that users type into form fields?
And that's exactly what we're going to learn about in the next lesson.
We will learn how to work with user submitted data in our server.
So perhaps we could include a question on our Web page that reads What color is the sky on a clear,
sunny day?
And then we could have a text input field where the user can type and then we can have a submit button
that they can click and then we can use our server to evaluate their answer and either send back a congratulations
response that says, yep, that's the correct answer, or send back a sorry response that says, nope,
try again.
That's incorrect.
This process of working with an evaluating user submitted data is crucial to becoming a full stack developer.
However, before we jump into that next lesson, I do have an important quick note to share.
When it comes to the server that we built in this lesson, I want you to know that you are the only
person who can access or view your server.
Remember, that's what the localhost in our address stands for.
It means your specific computer.
In the real world, we would want other people to be able to access our server or application.
So in the real world, we would send our code, our code that creates the server.
We would send that to a hosting company.
That company would host our server for us and make it publicly available.
And then instead of localhost three thousand, the address for our server could be our app dot com or
super awesome app dot com or whatever your domain is.
Big picture for right now.
You can rest assured that later on in the course we will indeed learn how to make a server publicly
available.
And when that time comes, you will be able to share the address to your server with your friends and
family and they will be able to access it and see what you built.
Because let's be honest, sharing something that you created with the people in your life that you care
about is the funnest aspect of learning anything new, and that includes programming.
But for now, we are just getting started.
We are just learning the basics.
So it's OK that we are using localhost and that we are the only ones that can view the server.
OK, having said that, we are ready to move on to our next lesson and learn how to work with user submitted
data.
Let's keep our momentum rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.